### Algal-Bloom-Forecasting
Algae are a critical part of aquatic food webs, but they can become overabundant and form blooms under certain conditions.
Blooms can intoxicate drinking water, cause illness or even death if consumed by animals or people. The blooms can also cause fish kills by drawing down oxygen to deficient levels. Recreation can also be affected by toxic blooms or just because no one wants to swim in scummy green water. For the same reason, increasing the abundance of algae also leads to decreases in property values.
So all of that explains what algal blooms are and why they are bad, but how does algal bloom forecasting help?  We still live by and rely on these water bodies, and in those cases, near-term bloom forecasting could be a practical tool for management. A bloom forecast looks the same as the weather forecasts you see every day look like, except instead of predicting whether it’s going to be rainy or sunny or cloudy, we are predicting if the water will be clear or filled with algae, and to what extent. Accurate predictions could give managers time to take proactive actions. Many seafood industries, local government agencies, and recreational sites at beaches directly benefit from the bloom forecasting tool.
This project aims to leverage high-frequency lake data to develop a real-time algal bloom forecasting tool. 
For this project, I use the experimental data collected from an experimental lake called Peter lake located at the University of Notre Dame Environmental Research Center on the Wisconsin-Upper Peninsula of Michigan border. These are small lakes on a private research station, where the Pace Lab has been conducting whole-lake experiments for over 30 years. The water quality data were collected in 5-minutes frequency, including Chlorophyll-a, PH, and DO. Weather data collected from the nearest weather station, including wind direction, wind speed, air temperature, and PAR data, are also available in 5 minutes frequency. The last piece of required data is the water temperature profile available in 5 minutes frequency. I used this data to engineer a new attribute called Zmix. The Zmix is the depth that water is considered thoroughly mixed. I calculated the temperature at Zmix, which could potentially be used to predict algae concentration. This project predicts Chrorophyl-a concentration as a proxy of algae bloom. 
As the next step in preprocessing data, we integrated all three datasets, treated the missing values and smoothed them daily. We also added the nutrient loading rate and calculated the cumulative rate. 
As the last step, we normalized all variables, especially the loading rates were normalized using lake color.
I trained different deep learning models for 2008-2018 and tested them on 2019 data. Some models are univariate, and others are multivariate.
The multivariate CNN model results in the best performance.
